Extracted from the file: "figasm, f69asm, computype master.atr"
Originally present at: "http://annex.retroarchive.org/disks/Atari/Forth-Disks/"

------------ CONCEPTS.001

                         Development system concepts
                             File:  CONCEPTS.DOC
 
 
      

Table of contents: 

          I.   Overview
          II.  Terminal sub-system
          III. Logic Analyser sub-system
          IV.  Game interface sub-system
               A. Hardware description
               B. Software description
               C. Game interface requirements
 
------------ CONCEPTS.002

                         Development System Overview
 
 
      This  document  is  an  overview  of  the  design  considerations and
 
   elements of  the development  system. Complete  hardware memory  maps of
 
   each  system  element  are  available  on  the PCB schematics ( Ask Dave
 
   Wiebenson ) .  Program file names are included for each program in  each
 
   system  element.   Owen  Rubin  is  currently  an expert at the terminal
 
   Forth system. Mike Albaugh is the Octopus communications expert as  well
 
   as the ROM  resident monitor expert  on the analyser  and Game Interface
 
   Board.  Steve  Calfee  can   help  with  Terminal  and   analyser  FORTH
 
   questions.



      The  development  system  is  composed  of  three major elements, the

   terminal ( or blue box ), the  logic analyser ( or white box ),  and the

   Game Interface  Board (  GIB )  ( also  in the  white box  ). All  three

   elements  of  the  development  system  have  separate memory spaces and

   communicate only  through I/O  interfaces (  see block  diagram drawing,

   attached ).   The terminal  has all  the external  I/O capability of the

   system,  including   keyboard  and   video  screen,   3M  magnetic  tape

   cartridge,  paper  tape  reader  (  now  unused ), two ACIA's for serial

   communications, floppy disk drive(s), and a real-time clock.  The  logic

   analyser receives  commands from  the terminal  with an  ACIA and passes

   communications to the game ( instead  of itself ) on a special  parallel

   interface  to  the  game  interface  board.   The  game  interface board

   receives all of  its commands via  the logic analyser  and this parallel

   interface.  The logic analyser is the middle-man in the system.



      All  three  elements  of  the  development  system  are   independent

   computers communicating with each other via the Lawrence Livermore  Labs

   Octopus  link  protocol  (  I  have  a  copy  of  the  original  article

   describing  this  protocol)  .   This  protocol  is  packet  based   and

   automatically retries on link errors.  There is a higher level  protocol

   ( called DESTIN )  that is not a  communications link protocol (  ie.  a

   link  is  a  bi-directional  point-to-point  communications path ).  The

   higher level protocol  DESTIN is packet  based and specifies  within the

   packet  sending  and  receiving  node  numbers. The Octopus protocol and

   DESTIN are completely invisible to each other.



      Each element in the DESTIN system checks the ÔĎ and ĆŇĎÍ node  number

   and passes  the message  to the  ÔĎ node  in that  processor (  if it is

   within that element  ) or (  if the processor  is the analyser  ) passes

   the  message  to  another  processor.   All  of  the  development system

   terminals ( blue boxes ) have  8 DIP switches to indicate the  terminals

   number in the high  5 switches which is  used as the terminals  node ÉÄ,

   and the  low 3  bits of  the node  ÉÄ number  designate one  of up  to 8

   independent  communications  nodes  in  the  terminal.  Terminals can be

   hooked together to  communicate using their  unique node IDs.   The only

   illegal  terminal  node  ÉÄ  is  zero  (  see  below  ), so there are 31

   possible unique terminal ÉÄs.  ÉÄ  0 is dedicated to the  game interface

   board resident monitor, and  ÉÄ 1 is available  on the game board  for a

   user program ( ie fig-FORTH running in a game ) to communicate with  the

   rest of the  system from a  game.  Node ÉÄ  2 is dedicated  to the logic

   analyser  resident  monitor,  and  node  ÉÄs  3  to  7  is available for

   independent communication nodes in the logic analyser processor.



      There  is  one  even  higher  level  communications  protocol  in the

   system, the resident monitor commands  ( called the COMMAND protocol  ).

   These  commands  are  common  to  both  the  game  board  and  the logic

   analyser.   The  only  commands  defined  are examine memory and deposit

   into  memory  and  registers,  report  abnormal  monitor  entries to the

   MASTER ÉÄ patched  into the GIB  ram by the  terminal ( for  BRKs, IRQs,

   NMIs, RESETs,  etc.), and  go to  a specified  address.  If  a packet is

   sent to node 0 or 2, it will be interpreted as a COMMAND packet.



      The terminal and logic analyser are programmed in a version of  FORTH

   based on the  PDP-11 DECUS user  group FORTH.  Most  of the software  in

   both is RAM  based, and must  be loaded when  the system is  powered-on.

   The terminal is loaded by the  S command to the terminal monitor  .  The

   analyser is loaded by the terminal ( after the FORTH system is booted  )

   when you type  ÁÎÁĚ ĚĎÁÄ.  The  analyser program must  be loaded to  use

   the  analyser  functions,  but  communications  between the game and the

   terminal will occur even if  the analyser program is not  loaded because

   of the EPROM analyser resident monitor on the analyser PCB in the  white

   box.



      The game interface board  ( GIB )is the  only hardware that needs  to

   be changed in the development system  in order to change to a  different

   processor.   The  GIB  is  conceptually  a  super-powerful  single  chip

   processor.  The GIB  plugs into the  processor chip socket  and requires

   the  same  signals  to  be  working  as  a real processor chip would ( a

   clock,  and  reset  high  ).   The  GIB  has memory from F000 to FFFF to

   accomodate its  I/O with  the logic  analyser and  its resident  monitor

   program, which implements the command interface with the logic  analyser

   and terminal. A  separate PCB in  the white box  is a 16K  RAM card that

   can be dialed  into the GIB  address space.  The  RAM can be  set to any

   set of two 8K  chunks of memory (  starting at even 4K  addresses ). The

   RAM memory can also be disabled in 1K chunks by DIP switches on the  RAM

   PCB. The GIB has fully buffered lines to a game board, so shorts on  the

   data/address buses  do not  prevent operation  of the  resident monitor.

   Addresses local to the GIB override all addresses on the game.  The  16K

   ram card addresses also override game board addresses.  

------------ CONCEPTS.003

                             TERMINAL SUB-SYSTEM
 
 
      The  development  system  terminal  contains the controlling software
 
   for the  rest of  the development  system. The  terminal handles all I/O
 
   operations including the keyboard commmands from the operator. 

 
 
      The terminal hardware consists  of 32K of RAM  memory from 0 to  8000
 
   and includes the 2K of video display RAM at 880 to 1000.  An  additional
 
   2K of  RAM has  been added  on a  "piggy-back" PCB  for disk  buffers at
 
   addresses D800 to  DFFF. The terminal  has I/O interfaces  to the system
 
   keyboard,  3M  mag  tape  reader,  a  paper  tape reader, two ACIA's for
 
   serial communications, and a 6532 Timer-I/O-RAM chip.



      The software for the terminal is composed of three different  levels.

   The  first  level  is  the  terminal  debugger  program named AYADS.MAC.

   AYADS is used to  debug software in the  terminal itself, and to  report

   breakpoints  in  the  terminal.   AYADS  resides  in  2K of EPROM on the

   terminal and is entered by pressing the RESET button on the back of  the

   terminal, or  by power-on  resets.  The  only command  that is typically

   used by a development system user is Ó to boot the disk.



      The  next  higher  level  of  software  is  the  MX  (  multi-tasking

   executive ) multi-tasking time-sharing  system kernel.  MX controls  the

   base-page/stack-page   mapping   and   task   sequencing   and  interupt

   dispatching. MX  is in  1K of  EPROM (  at F400  ) in the terminal along

   with the MX system disk driver in the other 1K at F000.



      The highest level  of software is  the FORTH program  which is booted

   in from disk  and is the  users interface to  the other elements  of the

   development   system.    Refer   to   DEVSYS.DOC  for  this  sub-systems

   documentation.



      

   PROGRAMS:

     RAM: ( described in link order )

          FAST4,MXTASK,COMMN2,MX2,ROMEQU,MXCOMM,DICT2

          FORTH definitions are on FORSYS.DAT on your DEVSYS diskette.

     ROM:

          TERMDS
          MX1,MXFD

------------ CONCEPTS.004

                          LOGIC ANALYSER SUB-SYSTEM
 
 
      The logic  analyser passes  communications between  the game  and the
 
   terminal.   The  analyser  is  also  an  independent  computer  that has
 
   special  hardware  with  connections  to  the  GIB  processor  pins. The
 
   analyser  contains  a  2K  resident  monitor  EPROM  and  a  2K  Octopus
 
   communications  protocol  program  EPROM.   There  is  16K of RAM in the
 
   analysers  6502  processor  address  space  that  can  be  loaded with a
 
   program to control  the logic analyser  functions ( loaded  by ÁÎÁĚ ĚĎÁÄ
 
   at the terminal).

 
 
      The software loaded by ÁÎÁĚ  ĚĎÁÄ is another version of  the terminal

   FORTH program and is controlled  by commands from the terminal  enclosed

   in ĹÓĂ key delimiters.



      The analyser  resident monitor  can be  told that  its communications

   node ÉÄ is zero, so the  debugging commands used for testing a  game can

   be used for testing a program  in the analyser. The terminal command  to

   tell the  analyser to  use the  GIB ÉÄ  is ÂĹÇÁÍĹ  ( and  to return  the

   analyser to the analyser ÉÄ type ÂĹÁÎÁĚ ).



      

   PROGRAMS:

     RAM:

          ANAL5.MAC
          Analyser FORTH definitions are in FORSYS.DAT on the DEVSYS diskette

     ROM:

          LACM.MAC,LARMON.MAC
          

------------ CONCEPTS.005

                       GAME INTERFACE BOARD SUB-SYSTEM
 
 
      The GIB pretends to be a super single-chip processor that plugs  into
 
   a normal processor IC socket. The address and data lines on the GIB  are
 
   completely buffered and only a minimally operational game is needed  for
 
   the development  system to  run. The  GIB occupies  4K of the processors
 
   memory space at F000 to FFFF and includes a 2K resident monitor  program
 
   and 128 bytes of RAM at F780 to F7FF.

 
 
      The  hardware  on  the  GIB  includes  a  parallel interface port for
 
   communications with the  analyser via the  Octopus protocol sub-set  and
 
   is  controlled  by  the  resident  monitor program. The resident monitor

   program resides at F800 to  FFFF and includes the hardware  ROM vectors.

   The last 8 bytes of the RAM  at F7F8 to F7FF can be address  mapped onto

   FFF8 to FFFF. The analyser has 2 bits in its I/O space that can  request

   the hardware on the GIB to do  an NMI or RESET through the ROM  vectors.

   All game NMI,  IRQ, BRK, and  RESETs go through  the RAM vectors  on the

   GIB. There  is a  hardware arbitration  network on  the GIB that selects

   the appropriate RAM or  ROM vectors depending on  the source of the  NMI

   or RESET.



      The  vector  mapping  allows  the  user  to specify RAM interrupt and

   reset vectors for the game  for no debug system overhead  on interrupts.

   The resident monitor  always enables this  mapping after the  monitor is

   entered by a special reset from the analyser board.  The logic  analyser

   can RESET the GIB  and NMI the GIB,  and these signals cause  the GIB to

   use the ROM vectors. This means that two sets of NMI's can be  operating

   simultaneously,  and  cause  execution  of  different NMI routines.  The

   reset  button  on  the  game  will  cause  a reset through the RAM reset

   vector,  so  if  the  RAM  contains  an  address pointing to a undefined

   op-code  (  which  causes  the  processor  to  lock-up ), the game reset

   button will not  actually reset the  game. The analyser  reset line will

   always reset the game via ROM vectors  so that you can then fix the  RAM

   vectors. The terminal command ŇĹÓ is used to do a patch in the  analyser

   resident monitor ( ÉÄ 2 ) which will actuate the reset line on the  GIB.

   If the analyser Octopus communications routine does not get  cooperation

   from the game for  communicating ( such as  when a user game  is running

   ), the analyser  will NMI the  game through the  ROM vector so  that the

   terminal  command  will  be  executed  by  the  GIB  even when a game is

   running.



      The GIB has hardware control  of write-protecting the 16K RAM  board,

   so at your option  the RAM can be  either RAM or become  "ROM".  The GIB

   also can disable game NMI's, which  it automatically does on a reset  to

   the resident  monitor.  In  addition to  these hardware  system controls

   the resident  monitor maintains  a software  flag to  indicate that  the

   game  stack  RAM  can  not  be  trusted.  The  stack is only used by the

   development system  when the  analyser NMI's  the GIB  for communication

   purposes.  The resident monitor does  not use z-page either, so  no user

   RAM  will  be  altered.  If  the  stack  RAM  is  not  to  be trusted, a

   development  system  NMI  will  cause  the  game program operation to be

   stopped, because the  NMI can not  be RTI'ed. There  is another software

   flag that tells the resident monitor  to disable game NMI's after a  BRK

   has occured.  Normally, the  NMI routine will continue.   These hardware

   and software  options are  controlled by  setting the  terminal variable

   ÇĂĎÎÄ with the proper bits ( see DEVSYS.DOC ).  The ÇĂĎÎÄ bits are  only

   sent to the game on the next ÇĎ or ĂĎÎÔ terminal command.



      Breakpoints  are   largely  handled   by  the   terminal,  with  some

   assistance by  the resident  monitor. There  are two  volatile execution

   blocks  (  VEBs  )  maintained  in  the  GIB ram.  On a BRK the resident

   monitor checks  the stacked  PC against  the address  in the "fast" VEB,

   and if it matches, the resident monitor decrements a counter and if  the

   counter is not zero, it executes the code previously stored in the  fast

   VEB by the terminal, otherwise,  when the counter is zero,  the resident

   monitor reports  the BRK  condition to  the terminal.   This fast VEB is

   used  to  BRK  on  the  nth  occurance  of  a BRK which is automatically

   continued from  at nearly  real-time. The  other VEB  is patched  by the

   terminal whenever a BRK occurs in the game, at an address not  specified

   in the fast  VEB address word,  to simulate the  instruction replaced by

   the BRK. Note that the terminal  reads the op-code from the game  memory

   when you request a  BRK, and then stores  a zero ( BRK  instruction ) at

   that address, so if the  terminal is re-booted all the  BRK instructions

   will still be in the game.



      

   PROGRAMS:

     ROM:

          6502 - YADS.MAC
          6809 - DEVS69.MAC
          6800 - DEVS68.MAC


------------ CONCEPTS.200 

                       GAME INTERFACE BOARD SUB-SYSTEM
 
 
      The GIB pretends to be a super single-chip processor that plugs  into
 
   a normal processor IC socket. The address and data lines on the GIB  are
 
   completely buffered and only a minimally operational game is needed  for
 
   the development  system to  run. The  GIB occupies  4K of the processors
 
   memory space at F000 to FFFF and includes a 2K resident monitor  program
 
   and 128 bytes of RAM at F780 to F7FF.

 
 
      The  hardware  on  the  GIB  includes  a  parallel interface port for
 
   communications with the  analyser via the  Octopus protocol sub-set  and
 
   is  controlled  by  the  resident  monitor program. The resident monitor

   program resides at F800 to  FFFF and includes the hardware  vectors. The

   last 8 bytes of the RAM at F7F8 to F7FF can be address mapped onto  FFF8

   to  FFFF.   This  allows  the  user  to  specify RAM interrupt and reset

   vectors for  the game  for no  debug system  overhead on interrupts. The

   resident  monitor  always  enables  this  mapping  after  the monitor is

   entered by a special reset from the analyser board.  The logic  analyser

   can RESET the GIB  and NMI the GIB,  and these signals cause  the GIB to

   use the ROM vectors. This means that two sets of NMI's can be  operating

   simultaneously,  and  cause  execution  of  different NMI routines.  The

   reset  button  on  the  game  will  cause  a reset through the RAM reset

   vector,  so  if  the  RAM  contains  an  address pointing to a undefined

   op-code  (  which  causes  the  processor  to  lock-up ), the game reset

   button will not  actually reset the  game. The analyser  reset line will

   always reset the game via ROM vectors  so that you can then fix the  RAM

   vectors. The terminal command ŇĹÓ is used to do a patch in the  analyser

   resident monitor ( ÉÄ 2 ) which will actuate the reset line on the  GIB.

   If the analyser Octopus communications routine does not get  cooperation

   from the game for  communicating ( such as  when a user game  is running

   ), the analyser  will NMI the  game through the  ROM vector so  that the

   terminal  command  will  be  executed  by  the  GIB  even when a game is

   running.



      The GIB has hardware control  of write-protecting the 16K RAM  board,

   so at your  option the RAM  can be either  RAM or ROM.  The GIB also can

   disable  game  NMI's,  which  it  automatically  does  on a reset to the

   resident monitor.   In addition  to these  hardware system  controls the

   resident monitor  maintains a  software flag  to indicate  that the game

   stack RAM can not be trusted. The stack is only used by the  development

   system when the analyser NMI's the GIB for communication purposes.   The

   resident monitor  does not  use z-page  either, so  no user  RAM will be

   altered. If the  stack RAM is  not to be  trusted, a development  system

   NMI will  cause the  game program  operation to  be stopped, because the

   NMI can not  be RTI'ed. There  is another software  flag that tells  the

   resident  monitor  to  disable  game  NMI's  after  a  BRK  has occured.

   Normally, the NMI  routine will continue.   These hardware and  software

   options are controlled by setting  the terminal variable ÇĂĎÎÄ with  the

   proper bits (  see DEVSYS.DOC ).   The ÇĂĎÎÄ bits  are only sent  to the

   game on the next ÇĎ or ĂĎÎÔ terminal command.



      Breakpoints  are   largely  handled   by  the   terminal,  with  some

   assistance by  the resident  monitor. There  are two  volatile execution

   blocks  (  VEBs  )  maintained  in  the  GIB ram.  On a BRK the resident

   monitor checks  the stacked  PC against  the address  in the "fast" VEB,

   and if it matches, the resident monitor decrements a counter and if  the

   counter is not zero, it executes the code previously stored in the  fast

   VEB by the terminal, otherwise,  when the counter is zero,  the resident

   monitor reports  the BRK  condition to  the terminal.  This fast  VEB is

   used  to  BRK  on  the  nth  occurance  of  a BRK which is automatically

   continued from  at nearly  real-time. The  other VEB  is patched  by the

   terminal whenever a BRK occurs  to simulate the instruction replaced  by

   the BRK. Note that the terminal  reads the op-code from the game  memory

   when you request a  BRK, and then stores  a zero ( BRK  instruction ) at

   that address, so if the  terminal is re-booted all the  BRK instructions

   will still be in the game.



      

   PROGRAMS:

     ROM:

          6502 - YADS.MAC
          6809 - DEVS69.MAC
          6800 - ??????????



